Uzbekistan (UK: , US: ; Uzbek: Oʻzbekiston, pronounced [ozbekiˈstɒn]), officially the Republic of Uzbekistan (Uzbek: Oʻzbekiston Respublikasi), is a country in Central Asia. It is one of two doubly landlocked countries as it is surrounded by Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. Uzbekistan is a secular, unitary constitutional republic. It comprises 12 provinces (vilayats) and one autonomous republic, Karakalpakstan. The capital and most populated city of Uzbekistan is Tashkent. 
What is now Uzbekistan was part of the Iranian-speaking region of Transoxiana and Turan. The first recorded settlers were Eastern Iranian nomads who founded kingdoms in Khwarazm, Bactria, Sogdia (8th–6th centuries BCE), Fergana and Margiana (3rd century BCE – 6th century CE). The area was incorporated into the Achaemenid Empire and after a period of Macedonian Greek rule, was ruled by the Parthian Empire and later by the Sasanian Empire, until the Muslim conquest of Persia in the seventh century. The Early Muslim conquests converted most of the people, including the local ruling classes, into adherents of Islam. During this period, cities such as Samarkand, Khiva and Bukhara began to grow richer from the Silk Road, and witnessed the emergence of leading figures of the Islamic Golden Age. The Khwarazmian dynasty, and Central Asia as a whole, were decimated by the Mongol invasion in the 13th century. Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur in the 14th century established the Timurid Empire and was proclaimed the Supreme Emir of Turan with his capital in Samarkand, which became a centre of science under the rule of Ulugh Beg, giving birth to the Timurid Renaissance. The territories of the Timurid dynasty were conquered by Uzbek Shaybanids in the 16th century, moving the centre of power to Bukhara. A region was split into three states: the Khanates of Khiva, Kokand and Emirate of Bukhara. Central Asia, bar Afghanistan, was gradually incorporated into the Russian Empire during the 19th century with Tashkent becoming the political center of Russian Turkestan. In 1924, national delimitation meant constituent republics of the Soviet Union, here the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, was created. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, it declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan on 31 August 1991. 
Uzbekistan's official language is Uzbek, a Turkic language written in a modified Latin alphabet and spoken natively by approximately 85% of the population. Russian has use as an inter-ethnic tongue (pidgin) and in governance. Uzbeks constitute 81% of the population, followed by Russians (5.4%), Tajiks (4.0%), Kazakhs (3.0%) and others (6.5%). Muslims constitute 79% of the people while 5% follow Russian Orthodox Christianity and 16% of the population follow other religions or are non-religious. A majority of Uzbeks are non-denominational Muslims. Uzbekistan is a member of CIS, OSCE, UN and SCO. While officially a democratic republic, by 2008 some non-governmental human rights organisations defined Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights".Following the death of Islam Karimov in 2016, the next president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev started a course which was described as a A Quiet Revolution and Revolution from Above. He stated he intended to abolish cotton slavery, systematic use of child labour, and exit visas, and to introduce a tax reform and create four new free economic zones and he has amnestied some political prisoners. Relations with the neighbouring countries of Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan improved.The Uzbek economy is in a transition to the market economy, with foreign trade policy being based on import substitution. In September 2017, the country's currency became fully convertible at market rates. Uzbekistan is a producer and exporter of cotton. With the power-generation facilities of the Soviet era and a supply of natural gas, Uzbekistan has become the largest electricity producer in Central Asia. As of late 2018, the republic was given a BB- rating by both Standard and Poor (S&P) and Fitch. Strengths indicated by Brookings Institution include Uzbekistan having large liquid assets, high economic growth and low public debt. Among the constraints holding the republic back are low GDP per capita, something the government could influence by changing how it accounts for sectors of the economy not currently included.


== Etymology ==
The name "Uzbegistán" appears in the 16th century Tarikh-i Rashidi.Three roots vie as to the adjective accompanying -stan (in the family of Iranian languages: "land of"):

"free", "independent" or the "lord himself" requiring an amalgamation of uz (Turkic: "own"), bek ("master" or "leader")
eponymously named after Oghuz Khagan, also known as Oghuz Beg
A contraction of Uğuz, earlier Oğuz, that is, Oghuz (tribe), amalgamated with bek "oguz-leader".All three have the middle syllable/phoneme being cognate with Turkic title Bek/Bey/Beg.


== History ==

The first people known to have inhabited Central Asia were Scythians who came from the northern grasslands of what is now Uzbekistan, sometime in the first millennium BC; these nomads settled in the region and built an irrigation system along the rivers. Cities such as Bukhoro and Samarqand emerged as centres of government and high culture. By the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Soghdian and Tokharian states dominated the region. As East Asian countries began to develop its silk trade with the West, Persian cities took advantage of this commerce by becoming centres of trade. Using a network of cities and rural settlements in the province of Transoxiana and further east in what is today Xinjiang, the Sogdian intermediaries became "the wealthiest" of these Iranian merchants. As a result of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhara and Samarkand eventually became wealthier and Transoxiana was an influential Persian provinces of antiquity.

In 327 BC Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire provinces of Sogdiana and Bactria. Resistance caused Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region that became the northern part of the Macedonian Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. The kingdom was replaced with the Yuezhi dominated Kushan Empire in the 1st century BC. For centuries the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by the Persian empires, including the Parthian and Sassanid Empires, as well as by other empires, for example those formed by the Turko-Persian Hephthalite and Turkic Gokturk peoples.
In the 8th century, Transoxiana, the territory between the Amudarya and Syrdarya rivers, was conquered by the Arabs (Ali ibn Sattor) becoming a focal point soon after of the Islamic Golden Age. Scientists lived there and contributed to its development after the conquest. Among the achievements of the scholars during this period were the development of trigonometry into its modern form, advances in optics, in astronomy, as well as in poetry, philosophy, art, calligraphy and others, which set the foundation for the Muslim Renaissance. In the 9th and 10th centuries, Transoxiana was included into the Samanid State. Later, Transoxiana saw the incursion of the Turkic-ruled Karakhanids, as well as the Seljuks (Sultan Sanjar) and Kara-Khitans.The Mongol invasion of Central Asia led to the displacement of some of the Iranian-speaking people of the region, their culture and heritage being somewhat superseded by that of the Mongolian-Turkic peoples who came thereafter. The invasions of Bukhara, Samarkand, Urgench and others resulted in mass murders and unprecedented destruction, such as portions of Khwarezmia being razed. Following the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and his family members. Despite the potential for fragmentation, the Mongol law of the Mongol Empire maintained orderly succession for several more generations, and control of most of Transoxiana stayed in the hands of the direct descendants of Chagatai Khan, the second son of Genghis Khan. During this period, most of present Uzbekistan was part of the Chagatai Khanate except Khwarezm was part of the Golden Horde. After the decline of the Golden Horde, Khwarezm was ruled by the Sufi Dynasty till Timur's conquest of it in 1388. Sufids rules Khwarezm as vassals of alternatively Timurids, Golden Horde and Uzbek Khanate till Persian occupation in 1510.

In the early 14th century, as the empire began to break up into its constituent parts, the Chaghatai territory was disrupted as the princes of various tribal groups competed for influence. One tribal chieftain, Timur (Tamerlane), emerged from these struggles in the 1380s as the dominant force in Transoxiana. Although he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan, Timur became the de facto ruler of Transoxiana and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea. He also invaded Russia before dying during an invasion of China in 1405. Timur's conquests were accompanied by genocidal massacres in the cities he occupied. Timur initiated the last flowering of Transoxiana by gathering together artisans and scholars from the lands he had conquered into his capital, Samarqand. By supporting such people, he imbued his empire with a Perso-Islamic culture. During his reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a range of religious and palatial constructions were undertaken in Samarqand and other population centres. Amir Timur initiated an exchange of medical discoveries and patronised physicians, scientists and artists from the neighbouring regions such as India; It was during the Timurid dynasty that Turkic, in the form of the Chaghatai dialect, became a literary language in its own right in Transoxiana, although the Timurids were Persianate in nature.The Timurid state split in half after the death of Timur. The internal fighting of the Timurids attracted the attention of the Uzbek nomadic tribes living to the north of the Aral Sea. In 1501 the Uzbek forces began a wholesale invasion of Transoxiana. There is the slave trade in the Khanate of Bukhara. Before the arrival of the Russians, present Uzbekistan was divided between Emirate of Bukhara and khanates of Khiva and Kokand.
In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand and spread into Central Asia. There were 210,306 Russians living in Uzbekistan in 1912. The "Great Game" period is regarded by some as running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907. A second, less intensive phase followed the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. At the start of the 19th century, there were some 3,200 kilometres (2,000 mi) separating British India and the outlying regions of Tsarist Russia. 
By the beginning of 1920, Central Asia was firmly in the hands of Russia and despite some resistance to the Bolsheviks, Uzbekistan and the rest of the Central Asia became a part of the Soviet Union. On 27 October 1924 the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic was created. From 1941 to 1945, during World War II, 1,433,230 people from Uzbekistan fought in the Red Army against Nazi Germany. A number also fought on the German side. As many as 263,005 Uzbek soldiers died in the battlefields of the Eastern Front and 32,670 went missing in action.On 20 June 1990, Uzbekistan declared its state sovereignty. On 31 August 1991, Uzbekistan declared independence after the failed coup attempt in Moscow. The Soviet Union was dissolved on 26 December of that year. 
Islam Karimov, ruler of Uzbekistan since independence, died on 2 September 2016. He was replaced by his Prime Minister, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, on 14 December of the same year.


== Geography ==

Uzbekistan has an area of 447,400 square kilometres (172,700 sq mi). It is the 56th largest country in the world by area and the 42nd by population. Among the CIS countries, it is the 4th largest by area and the 2nd largest by population.Uzbekistan lies between latitudes 37° and 46° N, and longitudes 56° and 74° E. It stretches 1,425 kilometres (885 mi) from west to east and 930 kilometres (580 mi) from north to south. Bordering Kazakhstan and the Aralkum Desert to the north and northwest, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to the southwest, Tajikistan to the southeast, and Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Uzbekistan is the only Central Asian state to border all the other four. Uzbekistan also shares a border less than 150 km or 93 mi with Afghanistan to the south.
Uzbekistan is one of two doubly landlocked countries in the world. In addition, due to its location within a series of endorheic basins, none of its rivers lead to the sea. Less than 10% of its territory is cultivated irrigated land in river valleys and oases, and formerly in the Aral Sea, which has somewhat desiccated in environmental disasters. The rest is the Kyzylkum Desert and mountains.

The highest point in Uzbekistan is Khazret Sultan at 4,643 metres (15,233 ft) above sea level, in the southern part of the Gissar Range in the Surxondaryo Region on the border with Tajikistan, northwest of Dushanbe (formerly called Peak of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party).The climate in Uzbekistan is continental, with some precipitation expected annually (100–200 millimetres, or 3.9–7.9 inches). The average summer high temperature tends to be 40 °C (104 °F), while the average winter low temperature is around −23 °C (−9 °F).

Decades of Soviet policies in pursuit of greater cotton production have resulted in a scenario with the agricultural industry being the main contributor to the pollution and devastation of both air and water in the country.The Aral Sea used to be the fourth-largest inland sea on Earth, acting as an influencing factor in the air moisture and arid land use. Since the 1960s, the decade when the use of the Aral Sea water escalated, it has shrunk to about 10% of its former area and divided into parts, with only the southern part of the western lobe of the South Aral Sea remaining permanently in Uzbekistan. Most of the water was and continues to be used for the irrigation of cotton fields, a crop requiring an amount of water to grow.Due to the Aral Sea problem, salinity and contamination of the soil with heavy elements are especially spreaded in Karakalpakstan, the region of Uzbekistan adjacent to the Aral Sea. The bulk of the nation's water resources is used for farming, which accounts for nearly 84% of the water usage and contributes to soil salinity. Use of pesticides and fertilisers for cotton growing further aggravates soil contamination.

According to the UNDP (United Nations Development Program), climate risk management in Uzbekistan needs to consider its ecological safety.

Some oil and gas deposits have been discovered in the south of the country.
Uzbekistan has also been home to seismic activity, as evidenced by the 1902 Andijan earthquake, 2011 Fergana Valley earthquake, and 1966 Tashkent earthquake.A dam collapse at Sardoba reservoir in May 2020 flooded some farmland and villages; this extended into areas inside Kazakhstan.


== Politics ==

After Uzbekistan declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, an election was held and Islam Karimov was elected as the first President of Uzbekistan on 29 December 1991. Karimov's first presidential term was extended to 2000 via a referendum, and he was re-elected in 2000, 2007, and 2015, each time receiving over 90% of the vote. Some international observers refused to participate in the process and did not recognise the results, dismissing them as not meeting basic standards.
The elections of the Oliy Majlis (Parliament or Supreme Assembly) were held under a resolution adopted by the 16th Supreme Soviet in 1994. In that year, the Supreme Soviet was replaced by the Oliy Majlis. The third elections for the bicameral 150-member Oliy Majlis, the Legislative Chamber and the 100-member Senate for five-year terms, were held on 27 December 2009. The second elections were held in December 2004 to January 2005. The Oliy Majlis was unicameral up to 2004. Its size increased from 69 deputies (members) in 1994 to 120 in 2004–05. The 2002 referendum also included a plan for a bicameral parliament consisting of a lower house (the Oliy Majlis) and an upper house (Senate). Members of the lower house are to be "full-time" legislators. Elections for the new bicameral parliament took place on 26 December.
Following Islam Karimov's death on 2 September 2016, the Supreme Assembly appointed Prime Minister Shavkat Mirziyoyev as interim president. Although the chairman of the Senate, Nigmatilla Yuldashev, was constitutionally designated as Karimov's successor, Yuldashev proposed that Mirziyoyev take the post of interim president instead in light of Mirziyoyev's "many years of experience". Mirziyoyev was subsequently elected as the country's second president in the December 2016 presidential election, winning 88.6% of the vote and was sworn in on 14 December.  Deputy Prime Minister Abdulla Aripov replaced him as prime minister. Mirziyoyev removed most of Karimov's officials and urged the government to employ "new, young people who love their country." After a year in office, Mirziyoyev moved away from some of his predecessor's policies. He visited all the Uzbek regions and some cities to get acquainted with the implementation of the projects and reforms which he ordered. Some analysts and Western media compared his rule with Chinese Communist Party leader Deng Xiaoping or Soviet Communist Party general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. His rule has been quoted as being an "Uzbek Spring".


=== Human rights ===

The Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan asserts that "democracy in the Republic of Uzbekistan shall be based upon common human principles, according to which the highest value shall be the human being, his life, freedom, honour, dignity and other inalienable rights."
The official position is summarised in a memorandum "The measures taken by the government of the Republic of Uzbekistan in the field of providing and encouraging human rights" and amounts to the following: the government does everything that is in its power to protect and to guarantee the human rights of Uzbekistan's citizens. Uzbekistan has improved its laws and institutions in order to create a "more humane" society. Over 300 laws regulating the rights and basic freedoms of the people have been passed by the parliament. For instance, an office of Ombudsman was established in 1996. On 2 August 2005, President Islam Karimov signed a decree that abolished capital punishment in Uzbekistan on 1 January 2008.Some non-governmental human rights organisations such as IHF, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, as well as United States Department of State and Council of the European Union, define Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights" and express concern about "wide-scale violation of virtually all basic human rights".
According to the reports, some of the violations are torture, arbitrary arrests, and various restrictions of freedoms: of religion, of speech and press, of free association and assembly. It has also been reported that forced sterilisation of rural Uzbek women has been sanctioned by the government.
The reports maintain that the violations are most often committed against members of religious organisations, independent journalists, human rights activists and political activists, including members of the banned opposition parties. As of 2015, reports on violations on human rights in Uzbekistan indicated that violations were still going on without any improvement. Freedom House has ranked Uzbekistan in the lower bottom half of its Freedom in the World ranking since the country's founding in 1991. In the 2018 report, Uzbekistan was one of the 11 worst countries for Political Rights and Civil Liberties.The 2005 civil unrest in Uzbekistan, which resulted in several hundred people being killed, is viewed by some as a landmark event in the history of human rights abuse in Uzbekistan.
A concern has been expressed and a request for an independent investigation of the events has been made by the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
The government of Uzbekistan is accused of unlawful termination of human life and of denying its citizens freedom of assembly and of expression. The government rebuffs some accusations, maintaining that it merely conducted an anti-terrorist operation, exercising only necessary force. In addition, some officials claim that "an information war on Uzbekistan has been declared" and the human rights violations in Andijan are invented by the enemies of Uzbekistan as a convenient pretext for intervention in the country's internal affairs. Male homosexuality is illegal in Uzbekistan. Punishment ranges from a fine to 3 years in prison.Uzbekistan also maintains the world's second-highest rate of modern slavery, 3.97% of the country's population working as modern slaves. In real terms, this means that there are 1.2 million modern slaves in Uzbekistan. Most work in the cotton industry. The government allegedly forces state employees to pick cotton in the autumn months. World Bank loans have been connected to projects that use child labour and forced labour practices in the cotton industry.Islam Karimov died in 2016 and his successor Shavkat Mirziyoyev is considered by some to be pursuing a less autocratic path by increasing co-operation with human rights NGOs, scheduling Soviet-style exit visas to be abolished in 2019, and reducing sentences for certain misdemeanor offences.The Amnesty International report on the country for 2017/2018 found some remnant repressive measures and lack of rule of law in eradicating modern slavery. In February 2020, the United Nations announced that Uzbekistan made "major progress" on stamping out forced labour in its cotton harvest as 94% of pickers worked voluntarily.


=== Foreign relations ===

Uzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December 1991. However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS collective security arrangement in 1999. Since that time, Uzbekistan has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in UN-organized groups to help resolve the Tajikistan and Afghanistan conflicts, both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability.

Previously closer to Washington (which gave Uzbekistan half a billion dollars in aid in 2004, about a quarter of its military budget), the government of Uzbekistan has recently restricted American military use of the airbase at Karshi-Khanabad for air operations in neighbouring Afghanistan. The relationship between Uzbekistan and the United States began to deteriorate after the "colour revolutions" in Georgia and Ukraine (and to a lesser extent Kyrgyzstan). When the U.S. joined in a call for an independent international investigation of the bloody events at Andijan, the relationship further declined, and President Islam Karimov changed the political alignment of the country to bring it closer to Russia and China. In July 2005, the government of Uzbekistan ordered the United States to vacate an air base in Karshi-Kanabad within 180 days. Karimov had offered use of the base to the U.S. after 9/11. It is also believed by some that the protests in Andijan were brought about by the UK and U.S. influences in the area of Andijan. This is another reason for the hostility between Uzbekistan and the West.
Uzbekistan is a member of the United Nations (UN) (since 2 March 1992), the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), Partnership for Peace (PfP) and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). It belongs to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) (comprising the five Central Asian countries, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkey, Afghanistan, and Pakistan). In 1999, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova) which was formed in 1997 (making it GUUAM), but pulled out in 2005. Uzbekistan is a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and hosts the SCO's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent. Uzbekistan joined the new Central Asian Cooperation Organisation (CACO) in 2002. It is a founding member of, and remains involved in, the Central Asian Union, formed with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, and joined in March 1998 by Tajikistan.
In September 2006, UNESCO presented Islam Karimov an award for Uzbekistan's preservation of its rich culture and traditions. This can be a sign of improving relationships with the West. The month of October 2006 also saw a decrease in the isolation of Uzbekistan from the West. The EU announced that it was planning to send a delegation to Uzbekistan to talk about human rights and liberties, after a period of hostile relations between the two. Although it is equivocal about whether the official or unofficial version of the Andijan Massacre is true, the EU is evidently willing to ease its economic sanctions against Uzbekistan. Nevertheless, the government may still stand firm in maintaining its closer ties with the Russian Federation. In some's theory, the 2004–2005 protests in Uzbekistan were promoted by the US and UK. 
In January 2008, Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva was appointed to her current role as Uzbekistan's ambassador to UNESCO. Karimova-Tillyaeva and her team have been instrumental in promoting inter-cultural dialogue by increasing European society's awareness of Uzbekistan's cultural and historical heritage.


== Administrative divisions ==

Uzbekistan is divided into 12 provinces (viloyatlar, singular viloyat, compound noun viloyati e.g., Toshkent viloyati, Samarqand viloyati, etc.), one autonomous republic (respublika, compound noun respublikasi e.g. Qoraqalpogʻiston Muxtor Respublikasi, Karakalpakstan Autonomous Republic, etc.), and one independent city (shahar, compound noun shahri, e.g., Toshkent shahri). Names are given below in Uzbek, Russian, and Karakalpak languages when applicable, although variations of the transliterations of each name exist.

The provinces are further divided into districts (tuman).


=== Most populated cities ===


== Economy ==

Uzbekistan mines 80 tons of gold annually, seventh in the world. Uzbekistan's copper deposits rank 10th in the world and its uranium deposits 12th. The country's uranium production ranks seventh globally. The Uzbek national gas company, Uzbekneftegas, ranks 11th in the world in natural gas production with an annual output of 60 to 70 billion cubic metres (2.1–2.5 trillion cubic feet). The country has untapped reserves of oil and gas: there are 194 deposits of hydrocarbons including 98 condensate and natural gas deposits and 96 gas condensate deposits.Uzbekistan improved in the 2020 Ease of Doing Business ranking by the World Bank.Along with some Commonwealth of Independent States or CIS economies, Uzbekistan's economy declined during the first years of transition and then recovered after 1995 as the cumulative effect of policy reforms began to be felt. It has shown growth, rising by 4% per year between 1998 and 2003 and accelerating thereafter to 7%–8% per year. According to IMF estimates, the GDP in 2008 will be almost double its value in 1995 (in constant prices). Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%.
Uzbekistan has GNI per capita of US$2,020 in current dollars in 2018, giving a PPP equivalent of US$7,230. Economic production is concentrated in commodities. In 2011, Uzbekistan was the world's seventh-largest producer and fifth-largest exporter of cotton as well as the seventh-largest world producer of gold. It is also a regional producer of natural gas, coal, copper, oil, silver and uranium.Agriculture employs 27% of Uzbekistan's labour force and contributes 17.4% of its GDP (2012 data). Cultivable land is 4.4 million hectares, about 10% of Uzbekistan's total area. Underemployment – especially in rural areas – is estimated to be at least 20%. Cotton production is part of the national economy. Uzbek cotton is used to make banknotes in South Korea. The use of child labour in Uzbekistan has led several companies, including Tesco, C&A, Marks & Spencer, Gap, and H&M, to boycott Uzbek cotton.

Facing a multitude of economic challenges upon acquiring independence, the government adopted an evolutionary reform strategy with an emphasis on state control, reduction of imports and self-sufficiency in energy. Since 1994, the state-controlled media have sometimes proclaimed the success of this "Uzbekistan Economic Model" and suggested that it is a unique example of a smooth transition to the market economy while avoiding shock, pauperism and stagnation. As of 2019, Uzbekistan's economy is a diversified one in Central Asia what makes the country an economic partner for China.The gradualist reform strategy has involved postponing some macroeconomic and structural reforms. The state in the hands of the bureaucracy has remained a dominant influence in the economy. Corruption permeates the society and grows more rampant over time: Uzbekistan's 2005 Corruption Perception Index was 137 out of 159 countries whereas in 2007, was 175th out of 179 countries. A February 2006 report on the country by the International Crisis Group suggests that revenues earned from cotton, gold, corn and increasingly gas are distributed more among a circle of the ruling elite. The recent corruption cases involving government contracts and international companies like TeliaSoneria have shown that businesses are vulnerable to corruption.According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, "the government is hostile to allowing the development of an independent private sector, over which it would have no control".The economic policies have repelled foreign investment which is the lowest per capita in the CIS. For years, a barrier to foreign companies entering Uzbekistan's market has been about converting currency. In 2003 the government accepted the obligations of Article VIII under the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing for full currency convertibility. However, currency controls and the tightening of borders have lessened the effect of this measure.

Uzbekistan experienced inflation of around 1000% per year after independence (1992–1994). Stabilisation efforts implemented with guidance from the IMF paid off. The inflation rates were brought down to 50% in 1997 and then to 22% in 2002. Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%. Tighter economic policies in 2004 resulted in a reduction of inflation to 3.8% (alternative estimates based on the price of a true market basket put it at 15%). The inflation rates moved up to 6.9% in 2006 and 7.6% in 2007 but have remained in the single-digit range.The government restricts foreign imports in ways including import duties. Excise taxes are applied in a discriminatory manner to protect locally produced goods. Official tariffs are combined with unofficial, discriminatory charges resulting in total charges amounting to as much as 100 to 150% of the actual value of the product, making imported products somewhat unaffordable. Import substitution is an officially declared policy and the government reports a reduction by a factor of two in the volume of consumer goods imported. A number of CIS countries are officially exempt from Uzbekistan import duties. Uzbekistan has a Bilateral Investment Treaty with 50 other countries.The Republican Stock Exchange (RSE) opened in 1994. The stocks of all Uzbek joint stock companies (around 1,250) are traded on RSE. The number of listed companies as of January 2013 exceeds 110. Securities market volume reached 2 trillion in 2012 and the number has grown due to the rising interest by companies of attracting necessary resources through the capital market. According to Central Depository as of January 2013 par value of outstanding shares of Uzbek emitters exceeded nine trillion.
Thanks in part to the recovery of world market prices of gold and cotton (the country's export commodities), expanded natural gas and some manufacturing exports, and increasing labour migrant transfers, the current account turned into a surplus (between 9% and 11% of GDP from 2003 to 2005). In 2018, foreign exchange reserves, including gold, totalled around US$25 billion.Foreign exchange reserves amounted in 2010 to US$ 13 billion.Uzbekistan is predicted to be in top 26 fastest-growing economies in the world in future decades, according to a survey by global bank HSBC.


== Demographics ==

As of 2019, Uzbekistan has the largest population in Central Asia with 32,768,725 citizens. 34.1% of the population are younger than 14 (2008 estimate). According to some sources, Uzbeks comprise a majority (80%) of the total population. Other ethnic groups include Russians 2%, Tajiks 5%, Kazakhs 3%, Karakalpaks 2.5% and Tatars 1.5% (1996 estimates).
About the Tajik population, while official state numbers from Uzbekistan put the number at 5%, the number is said to be an understatement and according to unverifiable reports, some Western scholars put the number up to 20%–30%. The Uzbeks intermixed with Sarts, a Turko-Persian population of Central Asia. Today, the majority of Uzbeks are admixed and represent varying degrees of diversity. Uzbekistan has an ethnic Korean population that was forcibly relocated to the region by Stalin from the Soviet Far East in 1937–1938. There are smaller groups of Armenians, mostly in Tashkent and Samarkand. The Bukharan Jews have lived in Central Asia, mostly in Uzbekistan, for thousands of years. There were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, most Central Asian Jews left the region for the United States, Germany, or Israel. Fewer than 5,000 Jews remained in Uzbekistan in 2007. Russians represented 5.5% of the total population in 1989. During the Soviet period, Russians and Ukrainians constituted more than half the population of Tashkent. The country counted nearly 1.5 million Russians, 12.5% of the population, in the 1970 census. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, emigration of ethnic Russians has taken place, mostly for economic reasons.
In the 1940s, the Crimean Tatars, along with the Volga Germans, Chechens, Pontic Greeks, Kumaks and some other nationalities were deported to Central Asia. Approximately 100,000 Crimean Tatars continue to live in Uzbekistan. The number of Greeks in Tashkent has decreased from 35,000 in 1974 to about 12,000 in 2004. The majority of Meskhetian Turks left the country after the pogroms in the Fergana valley in June 1989.At least 10% of Uzbekistan's labour force works abroad (mostly in Russia and Kazakhstan) and other countries.Uzbekistan has a 99.3% literacy rate among adults older than 15 (2003 estimate), which is attributable to the free and universal education system of the Soviet Union.
Life expectancy in Uzbekistan is 66 years among men and 72 years among women.


=== Religion ===

Uzbekistan is a secular country and Article 61 of its constitution states that religious organizations and associations shall be separated from the state and equal before law. The state shall not interfere in the activity of religious associations. Islam is the dominant religion in Uzbekistan, although Soviet power (1924–1991) discouraged the expression of religious belief, and it was repressed during its existence as a Soviet Republic. The CIA Factbook estimate that Muslims constitute 88% of the population (mostly Sunni) while 9% of the population follow Russian Orthodox Christianity, 4% other religious and non-religious. A 2010 Pew Research Center report stated that Uzbekistan's population is 96.5% Muslim. Russian Orthodox Christians comprised 2.3% of the population in 2010. An estimated 93,000 Jews lived in the country in the early 1990s.
In addition, there are about 7,400 Zoroastrians left in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tajik areas like Khojand.

Uzbeks have practised various versions of Islam. The conflict of Islamic tradition with various agendas of reform or secularisation throughout the 20th century has left a variety of Islamic practices in Central Asia. 96.3% are Sunni Muslim and rest secular or non-believers; 1% are Shias. The end of Soviet control in Uzbekistan in 1991 bring about re-acquaintance with the precepts of the Islamic faith and a resurgence of Islam in the country. Since 2015 there has been an increase in Islamist activity, with organisations such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan declaring allegiance to ISIL and contributing fighters abroad.

During the rule of Tamerlane in the 14th century, Jews contributed to his efforts to rebuild Samarkand, and a Jewish centre was established there. After the area came under Russian rule in 1868, Jews were granted equal rights with the local Muslim population. In that period some 50,000 Jews lived in Samarkand and 20,000 in Bukhara. After the Russian revolutions in 1917 and the establishment of the Soviet regime, Jewish religious life became restricted. By 1935 only one synagogue out of 30 remained in Samarkand; nevertheless, underground Jewish community life continued during the Soviet era. By 1970 there were 103,000 Jews registered in the Uzbek SSR. Since 1980s most of the Jews of Uzbekistan emigrated to Israel or to the United States of America. A community of several thousand remained in the country as of 2013: some 7,000 lived in Tashkent, 3,000 in Bukhara and 700 in Samarkand.


=== Languages ===

The Uzbek language is one of the Turkic languages belong to the Karluk branch. It is the official national language and since 1992 is officially written in the Latin alphabet. The written language of Uzbeks has been called Turki (Chagatai) and before the 1920s used the Nastaʿlīq script. In 1926 the Latin alphabet was introduced and went through several revisions throughout the 1930s. In 1940, the Cyrillic alphabet was introduced by Soviet authorities. In 1993 Uzbekistan shifted back to the Latin script (Uzbek alphabet), which was modified in 1996 and is being taught in schools since 2000. Educational establishments teach only the Latin notation. Even though the Cyrillic notation of Uzbek has now been abolished for official documents, it is still used by a number of newspapers and websites whilst a few TV channels duplicate the Latin notation with the Cyrillic one.
Karakalpak, a Turkic language closer to Kazakh, has an official status on the territory of the Republic of Karakalpakstan.
Although the Russian language is not an official language, it is still used in various fields. Digital information from the government is bilingual. Russian is a language for interethnic communication, especially in the cities, including day-to-day social, technical, scientific, governmental and business use. The country is home to approximately one million native Russian speakers.The Tajik language (a variety of Persian) is used in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand which has a larger population of ethnic Tajiks. It is also found in pockets in Kasansay, Chust, Rishtan and Sokh in Ferghana Valley as well as in Burchmulla, Ahangaran, Baghistan in the middle Syr Darya district, and finally in, Shahrisabz, Qarshi, Kitab and the river valleys of Kafiringan and Chaganian, forming altogether, approximately 10–15% of the population of Uzbekistan.There are no language requirements to attain citizenship in Uzbekistan.In April 2020, a draft bill was introduced in Uzbekistan to regulate the exclusive use of the Uzbek language in government affairs. Under this legislation, government workers could incur fines for doing work in languages other than Uzbek. Though unsuccessful, it was met with criticism by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova. In response, a group of Uzbek intellectuals signed an open letter arguing for the instatement of Russian as an official language alongside Uzbek, citing historical ties, the Russian-speaking population in Uzbekistan and the usefulness of Russian in higher education.


== Infrastructure ==

According to the official source report, as of 10 March 2008, the number of cellular phone users in Uzbekistan reached 7 million, up from 3.7 million on 1 July 2007. Mobile users in 2017 were more than 24 million. The largest mobile operator in terms of number of subscribers is MTS-Uzbekistan (former Uzdunrobita and part of Russian Mobile TeleSystems) and it is followed by Beeline (part of Russia's Beeline) and UCell (ex Coscom) (originally part of the U.S. MCT Corp., now a subsidiary of the Nordic/Baltic telecommunication company TeliaSonera AB).Internet Censorship exists in Uzbekistan and in October 2012 the government toughened internet censorship by blocking access to proxy servers. Reporters Without Borders has named Uzbekistan's government an "Enemy of the Internet" and government control over the internet has increased since the start of the Arab Spring.
The press in Uzbekistan practices self-censorship and foreign journalists have been gradually expelled from the country since the Andijan massacre of 2005.

Tashkent has a three-line rapid transit system built in 1977, and expanded in 2001 after ten years' independence from the Soviet Union. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan are currently the only two countries in Central Asia with a subway system. It is promoted as "one of the cleanest" systems in the former Soviet Union. The station Metro Kosmonavtov built in 1984 is decorated using a space travel theme to recognise the achievements of mankind in space exploration and to commemorate the role of Vladimir Dzhanibekov, the Soviet cosmonaut of Uzbek origin. 
There are government-operated trams and buses running across the city. There are also taxis, registered and unregistered. Uzbekistan has plants that produce cars. The car production is supported by the government and the Korean auto company Daewoo. In May 2007 UzDaewooAuto, the car maker, signed a strategic agreement with General Motors-Daewoo Auto and Technology (GMDAT, see GM Uzbekistan also). The government bought a stake in Turkey's Koc in SamKochAvto, a producer of buses and lorries. Afterward, it signed an agreement with Isuzu Motors of Japan to produce Isuzu buses and lorries.Train links connect some towns in Uzbekistan as well as neighbouring former republics of the Soviet Union. Moreover, after independence two fast-running train systems were established. Uzbekistan launched the first high-speed railway in Central Asia in September 2011 between Tashkent and Samarqand. The high-speed electric train Talgo 250, called Afrosiyob, was manufactured by Patentes Talgo S.L. (Spain) and took its first trip from Tashkent to Samarkand on 26 August 2011.There is an aeroplane plant that was built during the Soviet era – Tashkent Chkalov Aviation Manufacturing Plant or ТАПОиЧ in Russian. The plant originated during World War II when production facilities were evacuated south and east to avoid capture by advancing Nazi forces. With dissolution of the Soviet Union its manufacturing equipment became more outdated; most of the workers were laid off. Now it produces a few planes a year but with interest from Russian companies growing, there are rumours of production-enhancement plans.


=== Military ===

With close to 65,000 servicemen, Uzbekistan possesses the largest armed forces in Central Asia. The military structure is largely inherited from the Turkestan Military District of the Soviet Army, although it is going through a reform to be based mainly on motorised infantry with some light and special forces. The Uzbek Armed Forces' equipment is standard, mostly consisting those of post-Soviet inheritance and newly crafted Russian and some American equipment.
The government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union, acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as a non-nuclear state), and supported an active program by the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and Vozrozhdeniye Island). The Government of Uzbekistan spends about 3.7% of GDP on the military but has received a growing infusion of Foreign Military Financing (FMF) and other security assistance funds since 1998.
Following 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the U.S., Uzbekistan approved the U.S. Central Command's request for access to an air base, the Karshi-Khanabad airfield, in southern Uzbekistan. However, Uzbekistan demanded that the U.S. withdraw from the airbases after the Andijan massacre and the U.S. reaction to this massacre. The last US troops left Uzbekistan in November 2005.
On 23 June 2006, Uzbekistan became a full participant in the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), but informed the CSTO to suspend its membership in June 2012.


== Culture ==

Uzbekistan has a mix of ethnic groups and cultures, with the Uzbek being the majority group. In 1995 about 71% of Uzbekistan's population was Uzbek. The chief minority groups were Russians (8%), Tajiks (3–4.7%), Kazakhs (4%), Tatars (2.5%) and Karakalpaks (2%). It is said, however, that non-Uzbeks decline as Russians and other minority groups leave and Uzbeks return from other parts of the former Soviet Union.

When Uzbekistan gained independence in 1991, there was concern that Muslim fundamentalism would spread across the region. The expectation was that a country denied freedom of religious practice would undergo an increase in the expression of its dominant faith. As of 1994, over half of Uzbekistan's population was said to be Muslim, and increasing.


=== Music ===

Central Asian classical music is called Shashmaqam, which arose in Bukhara in the late 16th century when that city was a regional capital. Shashmaqam is somewhat related to Azerbaijani Mugam and Uyghur muqam. The name, which translates as six maqams refers to the structure of the music, which contains six sections in six different Musical modes, similar to classical Persian traditional music. Interludes of spoken Sufi poetry interrupt the music, beginning at a lower register and ascending to a climax before calming back down to the beginning tone.


=== Education ===
Uzbekistan has a literacy rate with about 99.3% of adults above the age of 15 being able to read and write. With 76% of the under-15 population at some point enrolled in education (and 20% of the 3–6 year olds attending pre-school), this figure may drop in the future. Students attend school Monday through Saturday during the school year, and education officially concludes at the end of the 12th grade. There are two international schools operating in Uzbekistan, both in Tashkent: The British School catering for elementary students only, and Tashkent International School, a K-12 international curriculum school.
Uzbekistan has encountered budget shortfalls in its education program. The education law of 1992 began the process of theoretical reform but the physical base has deteriorated and curriculum revision has been slower. A contributor to this is the lower level of wages received by teachers and the lower spending on infrastructure, buildings and resources on behalf of the government. Corruption within the education system exists with students from wealthier families bribing teachers and school executives to achieve expected grades without attending school, or undertaking official examinations.Several universities, including Westminster University, Turin University, Management University Institute of Singapore, Bucheon University in Tashkent, TEAM University and Inha University Tashkent maintain a campus in Tashkent offering English language courses across several disciplines. The Russian-language high education is provided by most national universities, including foreign Moscow State University and Gubkin Russian State University of Oil and Gas, maintaining campuses in Tashkent. As of 2019, Webster University, in partnership with the Ministry of Education, has opened a graduate school offering an MBA in Project Management and a MA in Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL).


=== Holidays ===

Variable date

End of Ramazon, Ramazon Hayit (Eid al-Fitr)
70 days later, Qurbon Hayit (Eid al-Adha)


=== Cuisine ===

Uzbek cuisine is influenced by local agriculture, as in most nations. There is grain farming in Uzbekistan so breads and noodles are components. Mutton is a variety of meat due to the amount of sheep in the country and it is part of various Uzbek dishes.
Uzbekistan's signature dish is palov (plov or osh), a main course typically made with rice, pieces of meat, and grated carrots and onions. Oshi nahor, or morning plov, is served in the morning (between 6 am and 9 am) to gatherings of guests, typically as part of an ongoing wedding celebration. Some other national dishes include shurpa (shurva or shorva), a soup made of pieces of fatty meat (usually mutton), and vegetables; norin and laghman, noodle-based dishes that may be served as a soup or a main course; manti, chuchvara, and somsa, stuffed pockets of dough served as an appetiser or a main course; dimlama, a meat and vegetable stew; and various kebabs, may be served as a main course.
Green tea is the national beverage; there are teahouses (chaikhanas). Black tea is used in Tashkent and both green and black teas are consumed, may be without milk or sugar. Tea may accompanies a meal but it is also a drink that is automatically offered: green or black to guests. Ayran, a chilled yogurt drink, may be used in summer.
Uzbekistan has 14 wineries, the oldest being the Khovrenko Winery in Samarkand (established in 1927). The Samarkand Winery produces a range of dessert wines from local grape varieties: Gulyakandoz, Shirin, Aleatiko, and Kabernet likernoe (literally Cabernet dessert wine in Russian). Uzbek wines have received international awards and are exported to Russia and other countries.


=== Sport ===

Racing cyclist Djamolidine Abdoujaparov has won the green jersey points contest in the Tour de France three times.Artur Taymazov won Uzbekistan's inaugural wrestling medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics, followed by three Olympic gold medals in Men's 120 kg in 2004, 2008 and 2012.
Ruslan Chagaev is a former professional boxer representing Uzbekistan in the WBA. He won the WBA champion title in 2007 after defeating Nikolai Valuev. Chagaev defended his title twice before losing it to Vladimir Klitschko in 2009. Another boxer Hasanboy Dusmatov, light flyweight champion at the 2016 Summer Olympics, won the Val Barker Trophy for the outstanding male boxer of Rio 2016 on 21 August 2016. On 21 December 2016 Dusmatov was awarded with the AIBA Boxer of the Year award at a 70-year anniversary event of AIBA.Michael Kolganov, a sprint canoer, was world champion and won an Olympic bronze in the K-1 500-meter. Oksana Chusovitina has attended 7 Olympic games, and won medals in artistic gymnastics. Some of those medals were won while representing Germany, though she also has competed for Uzbekistan.
Uzbekistan is the home of the International Kurash Association. Kurash is an internationalised and modernised form of traditional Uzbek wrestling.
Humo Tashkent, a professional ice hockey team was established in 2019 with the aim of joining Kontinental Hockey League (KHL). Humo will join the second-tier Supreme Hockey League (VHL) for the 2019–20 season. Humo play their games at the Humo Ice Dome which cost over €175 million in construction; both the team and arena derive their name from the mythical Huma bird, a symbol of happiness and freedom. Uzbekistan Hockey Federation (UHF) began preparation for forming national ice hockey team in joining IIHF competitions.
Before Uzbekistan's independence in 1991, the country was part of the Soviet Union football, rugby union, basketball, ice hockey, and handball national teams. After independence, Uzbekistan created its own football, rugby union, basketball and futsal national teams.
Uzbekistan hosts an International WTA tennis tournament, the "Tashkent Open", held in Uzbekistan's capital city. This tournament has been held since 1999, and is played on outdoor hard courts. Some of the tennis players from Uzbekistan are Denis Istomin and Akgul Amanmuradova.
Rustam Kasimdzhanov was the FIDE World Chess Champion in 2004.
Some other sports include basketball, judo, team handball, baseball, taekwondo and futsal.


== See also ==

Index of Uzbekistan-related articles
Outline of Uzbekistan


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Nahaylo, Bohdan and Victor Swoboda. Soviet Disunion: A History of the Nationalities problem in the USSR (1990) excerpt
Rashid, Ahmed. The Resurgence of Central Asia: Islam or Nationalism? (2017)
Smith, Graham,  ed. The Nationalities Question in the Soviet Union (2nd ed. 1995)


== External links ==
National Information Agency of Uzbekistan
Tashkent directory
Lower House of Uzbekistan parliament
Digital Agency Uzbekistan To Business Digital Agency
Chief of State and Cabinet MembersGeneral information

"Uzbekistan". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Uzbekistan Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal
Uzbekistan from the U.S. Library of Congress includes Background Notes, Country Study and major reports
Uzbek Publishing and National Bibliography from the University of Illinois Slavic and East European Library
Uzbekistan at UCB Libraries GovPubs
List of cities and populations
Uzbekistan at Curlie
Uzbekistan profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Uzbekistan
Key Development Forecasts for Uzbekistan from International Futures
International Border Crossing Points of UzbekistanMedia

National Television and Radio Company of Uzbekistan